# Chapter 1: Oveview of Computers and Programming Languages

## Computer Systems

Primarily handle IO operations, storage, arithmetic, and logical operations.
- Two main components: hardware and software.

#### CPU & Memory

CPU is the brain of the computer and memory (main/RAM) is connected to it directly.

Main memory is made of __Memory Cells__. Each cell has an __Memory Address__. Main memory is wiped upon losing power.
- Cells can store programming instructions or data.
- 0 and 1s.

Secondary storage is used to store data from main memory permanently.
- hard-drives, disks, etc.

#### Software

Two types: __System__ and __Application__ programs

__System Programs__
- Control the computer
    - __Operating system__ is the first program that loads upon boot.
        - Handles overall activity and provides services
        - Services include mem management, IO activities, storage management.

__Application Programs__
- Performs specific task.
- OS runs application programs.

#### Computer Language

Two types: __Analog__ and __Digital__ signals.

__Analog__
- Continuously varying continuous wave forms.

__Digital__
- Information stored as sequence of 0s and 1s.
- More reliable.
- Can be copied with exact precision.
- 0s and 1s are called __Bits__ (_Binary Digits_).
- Sequence of bits is referred to as __Binary Code__ (_Binary Number_)
- Seqeuence of 8 bits is known as a __Byte__.
- 2^10 bytes = 1024 bytes which is known as a __Kilobyte (KB)__.
- __Megabyte (MB)__ = 2^10 KB; __Gigabyte (GB)__ = 2^10 MB; and so on...

__American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)__
- Seven bit sequence of data for 128 characters numbered 0 through 127.

__Unicode__
- 65,536 characters stored using 16 bits (2 bytes).

#### Programming Language Evolution

__Machine Language__ is the most basic form of computer language. 

__Assembly Language__ is a step above with the use of _mnemonics_ to remember binary instructions easier.

__Assembler__ translates a program written in assembly to machine language equivalent.

High level languages are the next step forward from assembly.
- __Compiler__ translates high-level programming language instructions into equivalent machine language.

#### Processing A C++ Program

1. Text editor to edit/create the C++ program following the syntax of the language. Code is the __Source Code__ or __Source Program__.
    - Contains `.cpp` file extension.
2. Statements that begin with `#` symbol are called __Preprocessor Directives__. 
    - These statements are processed by a __Preprocessor__.
3. Compiler checks program for syntax errors; valid code is translated to machine language.
    - Machine language equivalent is known as __Object Program__.
4. Programs are written in __Integrated Development Environment (IDE)__. Prewritten code used by your program from your IDE is stored in a __Library__. __Linker__ combines the object program with other programs in libraries and is used in the program to create the executable. 
5. The executable program is loaded into main memory for execution. __Loader__ program accomplishes this task.
6. Execute.

## Programming with the Problem Analysis-Coding-Execution Cycle

__Algorithm__ is the step-by-step problem-solving process in which a solution is derived within a finite time-frame.

Programming problem-solving process:
1. Analyze/Outline the problem, requirements, and design an appropriate algorithm.
2. Implement the algorithm in a high-level language. Verify it works.
3. Maintain the program by using it and modifying it if the problem domain changes.

Analyzing programming problems:
1. Thoroughly understand the problem.
2. Understand the requirements.
    - Input, output, data manipulation, nature of the data, and how the data is represented.
3. Divide the problem into smaller problems and repeat steps 1 - 2.

Carefully analyzed and designed programs are much easier to follow and modify.

## Programming Methodologies

#### Structured

__Structured Design__ is dividing a problem into smaller problems.

The process of implementing structured design is known as __Structured Programming__.
    - This approach is also known as __top-down design__, __bottom-up design__, __stepwise design__, and __modular programming__.

#### Object-Oriented

__Object-Oriented Design (OOD)__
1. First step is to identify objects, which form the foundation for the solution. It is important to understand how these objects will interact with each other.
2. Indentify the relevant data fields for each object and operations possibly needed.
    - Objects combine data and operations on that data.
    - Programming languages that implement OOD are __Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)__ languages.

#### ANSI/ISO Standard C++

C++ evolved from C and was designed by Bjarn Stroustrup at Bell Laboratories in the early 1980s. C++ compilers limited the languages portability so __American National Standards Institute (ANSI)__ was established to standarize C++ syntax.
