# Basic Elements of C++

A __Computer Program__ is a sequence of statements that accomplish a task.

__Programming__ is a process of planning and creating a program.

## C++ Programs

Example of C++ _output_ statement:
```C++
cout << "Program to compute and output the perimeter and "
<< "area of a rectangle." << endl;
```

A program can contain various types of expressions such as arithmetic and strings.
    - Double quotes indicate a _String_.
    - String evaluate to itself.

`endl` causes the insertion point to move to the beginning of the next line.

Considering the following statement:
```C++
cout << "Length = " << length << endl;
```
The output consists of 2 expressions
    1. The first is `Length = "` (evaluates to itself)
    2. The second is `length` (identifier that evaluates to whatever length is)

A C++ program is a collection of functions, with a `main` function.
    - __Function__ is a set of statements that accomplish something.
    - the `main` function is required and is present in all C++ programs.

`//` Denote comments that are for the user.

The following line:
```C++
#include <iostream>
```
Enables us to use `cout` to generate the output and `endl`

```C++
using namespace std;
```
Allows us to use predefined objects or other methods without the prefix `std::`

```C++
int main()
```
Is the heading of the `main` function. The `{` that preceeds it marks the begining of the body of the function. `}` matches this brace and closes the body.

`<<` is an operator known as the _stream insertion operator_.

The following is a completed C++ program:
```C++
//**************************************************************
// Given the length and width of a rectangle, this C++ program
// computes and outputs the perimeter and area of the rectangle.
//**************************************************************

#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    double length;
    double width;
    double area;
    double perimeter;

    cout << "Program to compute and output the perimeter and "
    << "area of a rectangle." << endl;

    length = 6.0;
    width = 4.0;
    perimeter = 2 * (length + width);
    area = length * width;

    cout << "Length = " << length << endl;
    cout << "Width = " << width << endl;
    cout << "Perimeter = " << perimeter << endl;
    cout << "Area = " << area << endl;

    return 0;
}
```
Variable Declarations:
```C++
    // Allocates memory space and gives it respective name
    double length;
    double width;
    double area;
    double perimeter;
```
Assignment statements:
```C++
    length = 6.0; // Stores 6.0 in memory space `length`

    area = length * width; // Evaluates length * width and stores result in memory space `area`
```
Output of the program:
```
Program to compute and output the perimeter and area of a rectangle.
Length = 6
Width = 4
Perimeter = 20
Area = 24
```

__Variables__ allocate memory and give a name to the address.

## The Basics of A C++ Program

__Function__ is a collection of statements that when executed, accomplishes a task.
	- Some _predefined_ or _standard_ functions are already written and are a part of the system.

__Main__ function is mandatory.

__Syntax Rules__ tell you which statements are legal or valid.
	- __Semantic Rules__ determine the meaning of instructions.

A __Programming Language__ is a set of rules, symbols, and special words.

### Comments

Comments are for the reader, not the compiler.
	- Completely ignored by compiler.

Single-line comments begin with `//`

Multi-line comments begin with `/*` and are closed with `*/`

##### Special Symbols

__Token__  is the individual unit of a program written in any language.

Math:
	`+`
	`-`
	`*`
	`/`

Semicolons end a C++ statement `;`

Considered a single symbol:
	`<=`
	`!=`
	`==`
	`>=`

No character can come between two characters in a token, not even a blank.
	- Blanks are considered tokens

###### Reserved Words

Second category of tokens are reserved word symbols:
	- `int`
	- `float`
	- `double`
	- `char`
	- `const`
	- `void`
	- `return`

__Keywords__ is a name for reserved words.
	- Always made up of lower-case letters.
	- Immutable

##### Identifiers

Third category of tokens.

They are names of things that appear in a program
	- Variables, constants, and functions

__Identifiers__ consist of letters, digits, and underscore characters.
	- Begin with letter or underscore.
	- Some are predefined, others are defined by user.
	- No other symbols are permitted.

##### Whitespaces

Includes blanks, tabs, and newline characters