# Input ✧ Output

### I/O Streams and Standard I/O Devices

in C++, I/O is a sequence of bytes, usually chars.

__Stream__ is a sequence of characters from the source to the destination.

__Input Stream__ is a sequence of chars from an input device.

__Output Stream__ is a sequence of chars from the computer to an output device.

`iostream` is necessary for I/O and it contains two data types:
	- `istream` (input stream)
	- `ostream` (output stream)
	- Contains `cin` (common input) and `cout` (common output).

Vars of type `istream` are called __Input Stream Variables__.
	- Extraction Operator

Extraction Operator is binary and takes two operands.
	1. Input stream variable `cin` (left-side)
	2. Variable (right-side)

A single input statement can read more than one data item at a time:
```C++
cin >> payRate >> hoursWorked;

// Equivalent code
cin >> payRate;
cin >> hoursWorked;
```

`cin` examples:
```C++
// Statement 1
cin >> ch; 
// Input
// AB 
// Result
// ch = 'A', 'B' is held for later

// Statement 2
cin >> a >> ch >> z;
// Input
// 57 A 26.9
// Result
// a = 57, ch = 'A', z = 26.9

// Statement 3
cin >> ķ >> ch >> a;
// Input
// 36.78B34
// Result
// 36.78B34 z = 36.78, ch = 'B',
```
_Unused inputs are discarded, but mismatched data types are not allowed. They will result in **Input Failure**_.

Vars of type `ostream` are called __Output Stream Variables__.

__Stream Member Functions__ or __Stream Functions__:
	- `get`
	- `ignore`
	- `putback`
	- `peek`

### Using Predefined Functions

Functions take in __Arguments__ or __Parameters__.

Calling a function is called a __Function Call__.
	- This causes the function to execute.

Beware of including appropriate header files, argument data types, quantity of arguments, and what a predefined function achieves when using one. 

#### `cin` and `get`

The var `cin` can access the stream function `get`, which is used to read character data.

`get` function inputs the very next character (including whitespace) from input stream and stores it in the memory location indicated by its argument.

`get` syntax:
```C++
cin.get(varChar);
```
_varChar is a `char` variable and is the argument of the function._

You cannot use `get` to store other data types such as `int`.

#### `cin` and `ignore`

`ignore` discards a portion of the input

`ignore` syntax:
```C++
cin.ignore(intExp, chExp);
```
In the example above:
	-  `intExp` is an integer expression yielding an `int` value. This value specifies the max num of chars to ignore in a line.
	- `chExp` is a `char` expression yielding a `char` value. This value specifies which `char` triggers the input to not be ignored anymore.
	- Whichever comes first

#### `putback` and `peek` (137)

`putback` allows you to put the last `char` extracted from the input stream (by `get` function) back into the input stream.

Syntax:
```C++
istreamVar.putback(ch);
```
_`istreamVar` is an input stream variable such as `cin`_.

`peek` allows you to look into the input stream and tells you what `char` is next without removing it from the input stream.

Syntax:
```C++
ch = istreamVar.peek();
```
_`istreamVar` is an input stream variable such as `cin`, `ch` is a `char` variable_.
